adding documentation for query null semantics (#2865)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/querying/null-semantics.md

---

> title: Query null semantics in EF Core

Reviewer: Null comparisons in queries

(EF Core is auto-appended)

description: Information on how Entity Framework Core handles null comparisons in queries 
author: maumar
ms.date: 11/11/2020

> uid: core/querying/null-semantics

Reviewer: null-comparisons also rename file.

We refer to null semantics but let's use a more understandable word?

First two queries produce simple comparison. In the first query, both columns are non-nullable so null checks are not needed. In the second query, `NullableInt` could contain `null`, however `Id` is non-nullable. Comparing `null` to non-null yields `null` as a result, which would be filtered out by `WHERE` operation. No additional terms are needed either.

```sql
SELECT [e].[Id], [e].[Int], [e].[NullableInt], [e].[String1], [e].[String2]
FROM [Entities] AS [e]
WHERE [e].[Id] = [e].[Int]

SELECT [e].[Id], [e].[Int], [e].[NullableInt], [e].[String1], [e].[String2]
FROM [Entities] AS [e]
WHERE [e].[Id] = [e].[NullableInt]
```

Third query introduces the null check. When `NullableInt` is `null` the comparison `Id <> NullableInt` yields `null`, which would be filtered out by `WHERE` operation. However from the boolean logic perspective this case should be returned as part of the result. Hence EF Core adds the necessary check to ensure that.

```sql
SELECT [e].[Id], [e].[Int], [e].[NullableInt], [e].[String1], [e].[String2]
FROM [Entities] AS [e]
WHERE ([e].[Id] <> [e].[NullableInt]) OR [e].[NullableInt] IS NULL
```

> Queries four and five show the pattern when both columns are nullable. It's worth noting that `<>` operation produces more complicated (and slower) query than equality operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Queries four and five show the pattern when both columns are nullable. It's worth noting that `<>` operation produces more complicated (and potentially slower) query than `==` operation.
```

```sql
SELECT [e].[Id], [e].[Int], [e].[NullableInt], [e].[String1], [e].[String2]
FROM [Entities] AS [e]
WHERE ([e].[String1] = [e].[String2]) OR ([e].[String1] IS NULL AND [e].[String2] IS NULL)

SELECT [e].[Id], [e].[Int], [e].[NullableInt], [e].[String1], [e].[String2]
FROM [Entities] AS [e]
WHERE (([e].[String1] <> [e].[String2]) OR ([e].[String1] IS NULL OR [e].[String2] IS NULL)) AND ([e].[String1] IS NOT NULL OR [e].[String2] IS NOT NULL)
```

## Null semantics in functions

Many functions in SQL can only return `null` result if some of their arguments are `null`. EF Core takes advantage of this to produce more efficient queries.
The query below illustrates the optimization:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Querying/NullSemantics/Program.cs#Functions)]

> The generated SQL is as follows (we don't need to evaluate the `SUBSTRING` function):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The generated SQL is as follows (we don't need to evaluate the `SUBSTRING` function since it will be only null when either of the arguments to it is null.):
```

```sql
SELECT [e].[Id], [e].[Int], [e].[NullableInt], [e].[String1], [e].[String2]
FROM [Entities] AS [e]
WHERE [e].[String1] IS NULL OR [e].[String2] IS NULL
```

> The optimization can also be used for user defined functions. It can be done by adding `PropagatesNullability()` call to the relevant function parameters model configuration.

Reviewer: Should move this to user-defined function mapping page and add reference to here.

> This optimization can also be used for user defined functions. This can be done by adding `PropagatesNullability()` call to relevant function parameters model configuration.

Author: TODO: reference udf docs

To illustrate this, define two user functions inside the `DbContext`:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Querying/NullSemantics/NullSemanticsContext.cs#UdfBody)]

The model configuration (inside `OnModelCreating` method) is as follows:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Querying/NullSemantics/NullSemanticsContext.cs#UdfModelConfiguration)]

> First function is configured in a standard way. The second function is configured to take advantage of the nullability propagation optimization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first function is configured in the standard way. The second function is configured to take advantage of the nullability propagation optimization, providing more information on how the function behaves around null parameters.
```

When issuing the following queries:

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Querying/NullSemantics/Program.cs#UdfExamples)]

We get this SQL:

```sql
SELECT [e].[Id], [e].[Int], [e].[NullableInt], [e].[String1], [e].[String2]
FROM [Entities] AS [e]
WHERE [dbo].[ConcatStrings]([e].[String1], [e].[String2]) IS NOT NULL

SELECT [e].[Id], [e].[Int], [e].[NullableInt], [e].[String1], [e].[String2]
FROM [Entities] AS [e]
WHERE [e].[String1] IS NOT NULL AND [e].[String2] IS NOT NULL
```

> Just like with built-in `Substring` function, the second query doesn't need to evaluate the function itself to test its nullability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Just like with the built-in `Substring` function, the second query doesn't need to evaluate the function itself to test its nullability.
```

> [!NOTE]

> > This optimization should only be used if the function can only return `null` becuase it's parameters are `null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This optimization should only be used if the function can only return `null` when it's parameters are `null`.
```

> ## Optimizations and considerations

Author: Any ideas for better name? Wanted to use "best practices" but acrolinx is complaining

Reviewer: Write performant queries

Reviewer 2: We should also link to this from [the perf docs on efficient querying](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/performance/efficient-querying), possibly add an "Additional resources" section there to link to here.

> - Comparing non-nullable columns is simpler and faster than comparing nullable columns. Consider marking columns as non-nullable wherever it is possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Comparing non-nullable columns is simpler and faster than comparing nullable columns. Consider marking columns as non-nullable whenever possible.
```

> - `Equal` comparison is simpler and faster than `NotEqual`, because query doesn't need to distinguish between `null` and `false` result. Use equality comparison whenever it's possible.

Reviewer: Should use ==/!= operators.

Reviewer 2: Another alternative is "Checking for equality (`==`) is simpler and faster than checking for non-equality (`!=`)".

Also as above:

```suggestion
- `Equal` comparison is simpler and faster than `NotEqual`, because query doesn't need to distinguish between `null` and `false` result. Use equality comparison whenever possible.
```

> [!NOTE]

> > Wrapping `Equal` comparison around `Not` is effectively `NotEqual`. `Equal` comparison is only faster/simpler if it is not negated.

Reviewer: Same operators. Can use example too.

Reviewer: Don't add note in middle of a bulleted list. Inline it or make a new point.

> > Wrapping `Equal` comparison around `Not` is effectively `NotEqual`. `Equal` comparison is only faster/simpler if it is not negated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Wrapping an `Equal` comparison around `Not` is effectively the same as `NotEqual`. An `Equal` comparison is only faster/simpler if it is not negated.
```

> - In some cases, it is possible to simplify a complex comparison by filtering out `null` values from a column explicitly - for example when no `null` values are present or these values are not relevant in the result. Consider the following example:

Reviewer 2: Users are probably going to ask why we're not doing that for them :)

Author: we have a good alibi - we don't know if there are nulls in the data or when they are present, that they are irrelevant.

[!code-csharp[Main](../../../samples/core/Querying/NullSemantics/Program.cs#ManualOptimization)]

These queries produce the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT [e].[Id], [e].[Int], [e].[NullableInt], [e].[String1], [e].[String2]
FROM [Entities] AS [e]
WHERE ((([e].[String1] <> [e].[String1]) OR [e].[String1] IS NULL) AND [e].[String1] IS NOT NULL) OR ((CAST(LEN([e].[String1]) AS int) = CAST(LEN([e].[String1]) AS int)) OR [e].[String1] IS NULL)

SELECT [e].[Id], [e].[Int], [e].[NullableInt], [e].[String1], [e].[String2]
FROM [Entities] AS [e]
WHERE [e].[String1] IS NOT NULL AND (CAST(LEN([e].[String1]) AS int) = CAST(LEN([e].[String1]) AS int))
```

> In the second query, `null` results are filtered out from `String1` column explicitly. EF Core can safely treat the `String1` column as non-nullable during comparison, which results is simpler query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the second query, `null` results are filtered out from `String1` column explicitly. EF Core can safely treat the `String1` column as non-nullable during comparison, resulting in a simpler query.
```

## Using relational null semantics

> It's possible to disable the null comparison compensation and use relational null semantics directly. This can be done by calling `UseRelationalNulls(true)` method on the options builder inside `OnConfiguring` method:

Reviewer 2: We may want to add a warning such as:

> [!WARNING]
> When using relational null semantics, your LINQ queries no longer have the same meaning as they do in C#, and may yield different results than expected. Exercise caution when using this mode.

Author: I just responded to an issue about this and thought of the same thing. Some extra context/warning will be useful.
